Welcome back.
In this lesson we're going to talk about one of the key inputs to the gradient descent function.
And this is the learning rate.
So let's add a big section heading in a markdown cell.
So when I click on this cell here changed from code to markdown at one pound symbol and then write the
learning rate
scrolling back up to where we've defined our gradient descent function.
Let's take another look at our inputs previously with modified our Python code so that the inputs would
include not only the derivative function and the initial guess but also a multiplier precision.
And the maximum number of iterations.
So far we've changed up the initial guesses and analyzed the impact that this had on the algorithm in
different situations on different cost functions.
But we've not really messed with the multiplier and this is what we're gonna do now.
So what does the learning rate actually do in our algorithm.
If we look at our update step namely this line right here we can see that our learning rate which I've
called multiplier is multiplied with the gradient the gradient is the value of the slope of the cost
function and the multiplier.
It's just a constant but together they determine how big of a step we take.
So if you remember with the gradient when the slope was steep then the gradient was a large number.
And we take a big step.
And similarly if the multiplier is launch we also take a big step.
So at the moment we've got the multiplier set to a default value of zero point zero two.
Now this might be a good time to maybe pause the video and think about what would happen if we picked
a different value say what would happen if this value was really really small and what would happen
if the multiplier value was really really large.
Now I'm going to illustrate the effect of the multiplier taking our second example.
This was the G of X function.
I'm going to take this cell right here.
This was the cell that generated our graphs and plotted our scatter plot for our gradient descent.
On that you have X function going to copy this cell right here with the shortcut and a scroll all the
way down to our learning rate.
And I'm going to paste the cell below.
I probably don't need the cell up here right at the moment so I'm just going to take this one and move
it up and I'm gonna modify it a little bit.
I'm gonna add some print statements below our charts at the bottom.
The first print statement I'm going to add is the number of steps
and if you recall this was the length of this list the length of list underscore x.
So we'll write alien parentheses.
List underscore X..
The other thing that I want to modify is the initial guest that we've got.
So I'm going to change this to one point nine.
And I'm also going to add a multiplier here.
So when I add multiplier equals I'm not gonna change the default value just yet.
Let's just have it at zero point zero two.
And since I haven't run my notebook in a little while I'm actually going to go to cell and run all instead
of running just my latest cell and then I won't have to scroll all the way down to the bottom and there's
our output.
So it works as expected.
So if I start at one point nine which is right here then the first step that we take is fairly large
right here and then we slowly move down to our minimum and at the moment all it takes is 14 steps to
get to the bottom.
Okay.
So this works as expected.
Now let's have a little bit more fun with this.
So when to change our function call to have a maximum of five iterations.
So only one hour loop to run five times and then I'm also gonna change our multiplier from zero point
zero two to zero point to five.
And then I want to rerun the cell and then we can have a look at our chart.
So what are we seeing here now.
Our multiplier is increasing our step size and we see our algorithm bouncing around on this function.
So this is very very different behavior from what we've seen before.
But let's take this to an extreme.
I'm going to scroll back up to our function call and change the maximum number of times that our loop
will run from five to 500 and we hit shift into and scrolling down we see this the whole chart is turning
red.
Yeah we're bouncing around all over the place but our algorithm is never converging.
In fact our loop at this point has run 500 times.
In contrast we were at what 14 earlier in the number of steps.
So this is very interesting right.
What can we learn from this example.
In almost every situation that we've illustrated previously we've converged between like 20 or 60 steps
remember this time our loop ran 500 times and the algorithm still didn't find the minimum.
So what we're seeing here is that if we're not careful we can get into a situation where our algorithm
isn't converging and it just might continue going and going and going and this kind of brings us back
to our discussion about Python for loops and Python while loops.
Let me scroll back up to where we wrote that code.
Here we go.
Now you might remember that with a while loop you as the developer have to take extra care with your
terminating condition.
What's the terminating condition.
It's whatever follows the while keyword right here.
So if the logic in this terminating condition isn't formulated well then it's very easy to get into
a scenario where you're never exiting the loop and then your python program accidentally ends up in
an infinite loop.
In other words with a Y loop you as the programmer need to think of the corner cases and include the
logic to stop your loop from running longer than you intended to.
I know in this example if you're looking at this code this seems really really trivial but infinite
loops happen maybe more often than you expect.
Let me show you an example.
We could have written our gradient descent function with a Y loop instead of a for loop.
This is our gradient descent function as it currently stands with a for loop and a cutoff point determined
by the maximum number of iterations.
And this is how one could imagine running our gradient descent with a Y loop.
At first glance this Y loop would seem to make sense.
The condition for running the loop is run the loop as long as the step size is greater than the precision.
The step size is always the difference between the new X and the previous X..
So at some point that calculation would get more and more precise at which point we would exit loop.
Fair enough but this is exactly the kind of code that risks running into the infinite loop problem because
in the case where one isn't converging and the step sizes between the values get larger this loop just
continues running.
So I'm not going to keep this cell around negative edit delete cell and this is why the for loop provides
quite a quite a big contrast right.
It's got this safety net by forcing you to explicitly state the number of times it will run ahead of
time.
Now let's crank up that learning rate even more.
Scroll back down here and I'm going to increase our learning rate from zero point to five to zero point
three when I leave everything else the same.
And rerun this thing.
See what happens.
This is our old friend the overflow era.
The result is too large.
We've shut off to infinity and beyond what this little exercise is showing us is how there's another
quirk that we have to be aware of with our optimization algorithms.
We at the machine learning experts have to choose an appropriate learning rate.
So that begs the question how do we know what the right learning rate actually is.
Because that's what we've seen.
If we pick a very large learning rate then our algorithm doesn't converge.
And if we pick a very very small learning rate then our algorithm might actually take forever.
What I mean by forever.
Let me show you.
I want to scroll back up where we've called our function when change this again to something that doesn't
crash our python program so zero point zero or two and then I gonna copy this bit of code right here
so that's the code where we're calling our function and the code were plotting our first shot.
No I don't like seeing that error.
So I'm going to rerun the cell and then I'm going to paste our code down here.
Now I'm going to change this comment here.
I'm going to call it run gradient descent three times.
But before we run it three times.
Let's run it at one time.
So.
So here's what I'm going to do.
Instead of having the max iteration set to 500 here I'm going to set this equal to a variable.
So going to say and is equal to one hundred and then instead of having a max iterations set to 500 and
then set it equal to and it's going to specify the maximum number of iterations up here.
Then I'm going to change the multiplier from zero point zero two to zero point zero zero zero five and
then I'm going to add a precision I'm going to make it quite precise the calculation in the C precision
should be equal to zero point zero zero zero one comma and then have the maximum number of iterations
back here and for the initial guess we'll start off at three.
So this is gonna be our first call to the gradient descent function.
But instead of having this sequence unpacking code here we're gonna store all of this information in
a single tuple.
So this is gonna be called low Gamma Gamma.
It's often used for learning rate.
So we'll call our tuple low Gamma.
Now let's change up the code for our Plot to Change the comment here to the plotting reduction in cost
for each iteration.
So this is gonna be our goal in terms of the figure size.
We're gonna go with a single plot.
So I'm going to size this plot differently from before to make it 20 by 10 it's going to be quite large.
And then when it delete this subplot code here we don't need that.
And then four axes we're gonna go on the y axis.
We're gonna go from zero to 50.
So this is gonna be our cost.
Cost is gonna be in the y axis.
See this in a bit and our x axis is gonna go from zero to the number of iterations.
So it's gonna go from zero to n and it's gonna be a hundred gonna have the iterations on our x axis.
So our x axis is gonna go from zero to n the title of the chart is gonna be the effect of the learning
rate and for the X label will have the number of iterations.
And for the Y label we're gonna have the cost now we need the data to populate our charts so we need
the values for our charts and we need two things.
The first thing is going to be what we have on our y axis.
That's going to require us to.
And that's going to require us to convert the the lists to name pi arrays.
Reason being we can feed an array into our geophysics function but we cannot feed a list into our G
of X function.
So we've done this previously.
I'm gonna call our first array low values set that equal to NPR Ray low gamma.
And it was the second item in our tuple.
Why did I just put a one there.
Because the second item is at index 1 because we start counting from zero.
The first item is at index 0.
The second item is that index 1.
Okay.
So that's our y axis data.
Time to get our x axis data.
Now we just need our x axis to go from 0 to like 100.
Right.
So too is when I create a list from 0 2 and plus 1 y and plus 1 because we've got that extra initial
guess.
So even though our loop is running run 100 times our extra guests it's going to mean we should have
100 plus one.
And when a store has information in a variable called iteration on the score list.
So how do we create a list in the past.
Let me scroll down here a little bit in the past we've had our square brackets and we said 0 1 2 3.
Right.
We just populated that list with values.
But this isn't what we're gonna do because we're not going to type out 100 different values in this
list.
Instead of creating this list manually what we're going to do instead is going to make use of this range
function that we solve the for loop our range has a starting value and an ending value.
So it's going to create all our values from 0 to and plus 1 but we can't do it like this.
Exactly.
The reason is is that if I press shift tab on this function I can see that this thing here will actually
spit out a Range object.
So this range function will give us a Range object but what we need is a list.
So how do we convert a Range object to a list.
Well we can call the list function and then next the call to the range function inside our call to the
list function.
So now we'll have a list starting from zero going to end plus 1.
That's gonna be stored inside our variable called iteration list.
And this is what we're going to take and we're gonna put that right here on our plot.
So when I put that here and then for our y axis on this plot we're gonna use our well lo underscore
values we're going to use our array of values for our cost function.
And we also don't have to stick to the blue color.
There's a lot of colors available including like light green for example and we can make the line of
it thicker.
Change the line with from three to five and we're going to get rid of the Alpha as well.
Now I'm going to come on out the plot dots scattered code and just show our plot for a change.
So I'm going to say peel teed off show parentheses at the end and hit shift enter to see what we get.
Okay so we get a nice line plot right here.
Just like this.
So this is cool but you know what.
We're gonna take our scatter functionality and use it as well.
That week we get a little bubble each time our loop was run so that way we can see the step size a bit
more clearly.
So our x axis is going to be the iteration on the score list again and for our y axis it was going to
be our low underscore values array.
When I change it to the same color as with a hard line plot.
So it's gonna be color light green.
And for the DOT size we'll change it from 100 to 80 and get rid of the Alpha as well.
So let me rerun this.
See what it looks like huh.
This is pretty good.
So large a step size in the beginning getting smaller until the steps are very very close at the end.
So what we're looking at here is the decrease in the cost with each iteration of our loop.
I think this is really really neat but it'll be even neat if we can plot two different learning rates
or three different learning rates on the same chart next to each other and see how they compare to scroll
back up here and I'm going to correct my typo in the title to have effect of learning rate with a space
I'm going to add a little comment here as well.
I going to say plotting low learning rates and then I'm going to scroll back up to the beginning and
put my cursor right here.
Now as a challenge can you plot two more learning rates on our chart.
So pause the video add a tuple called mid gamma and keep all the inputs to the call to the gradient
descent function the same but change the multiplier to double the learning rate to zero point zero zero
one and then create another tuple called high gamma and change the learning rate there to zero point
zero zero two.
Now you're gonna have to extract the values from the tuple that you get back and throw those onto our
chart.
I'll give you a few seconds to pause the video and give this a try and here's the solution so the quickest
way to do this is to copy this code here paste it two times change the name of the tuple to mid gamma
change the name of this tuple to high gamma and then this multiplier is gonna be zero point zero zero
one.
This multiplier is gonna be zero point zero zero to and then we're to come down here.
Take this code right here.
Copy it paste it twice and it changed my comment plotting mid learning rate plotting high learning rate
and then instead of feeding the low values into our array here I want to make a call to NPR rate and
then put an R tuple MIT gamma
I'm going to take this.
Copy it.
Put it here as well.
MIT Gamma One.
And this is going to be
NPR Ray.
Hi Gamma 1 and same with this one.
It's gonna be NPR a high gamma 1 but one thing that I'm gonna change as well is the color.
I don't want all of these graphs to have the very very same color.
Otherwise I can't tell them apart from the chart.
One nice color to contrast the light green is steel blue.
This is gonna be for.
This is gonna be for the slightly higher learning rate and then for the highest learning rate on this
chart.
Pick my favorite color hot pink.
Why not.
Tarragon.
I'm not making these color names up.
Yeah.
I haven't taking them from the map plot lib official documentation.
So these are the names that I can put into that argument.
So there's a predefined number of names that you can use and spelling has to match exactly.
Otherwise they won't recognize them.
Case I've got my chance now.
The proof is in the pudding as they say.
Hit shift enter and let's see what we get.
So I think this chart is beautiful because it illustrates so nicely how our learning a trade affects
our algorithm.
We've run our gradient descent three separate times with different learning rates and now we can see
how the cost decreases with each iteration of the loop and what we're seeing here is that the highest
learning rate the one in hot pink converges the fastest.
In other words the higher the multiplier the faster the convergence.
And in contrast we've got the really low multiplier converging very very slowly to the minimum.
Now if we've picked an even lower multiplier then it would reach the minimum even more slowly but as
we've shown before the higher multiplier is only better up to a point right.
Remember how in our earlier example our entire graph was red.
Clearly having like a really high multiplier you either get an overflow error or we don't converge on
our minimum.
So higher multipliers don't always work out.
In fact let's plot this crazy behavior that we had early on on this chart as well so when we go up here
and had a common to call it experiment and then I'm going to take my Python code copy it pasted here
and maybe call this insane Gamma.
Now my initial guess was one point nine and an early example.
And the multiplier was zero point to five if I remember correctly.
Now all I need to do is come down here take this bit of code here paste it and I want to modify it so
read plotting insane loading rate and this is gonna be r in sane gamma
hand.
In terms of color let's go for just good old red to uh show that this is not a good thing.
How can head shift enter and see how that behaves.
So what have we got.
Whew that looks that looks really bad.
So in their fourth example we started out much closer to the minimum.
We started out with an initial guess of one point nine and that's compared to the initial guess of three
which is where we started out with the other functions.
So even though on our initial guess was actually much better and our cost was much lower it doesn't
actually help us when our learning rate is all screwed up so we can see here that our cost doesn't actually
come down.
He even though that algorithm has been running 100 times we just have our cost bouncing around decreasing
increasing decreasing again and in the end after a hundred iterations we can see that our cost here
at the end is actually much higher than what the cost is for all the other examples.
So all the other learning rates after a hundred iterations had a lower cost.
Even then are really really high multiplier of zero point two five.
So I think that illustrates the problem really nicely when the algorithm is bouncing around with no
clear direction and I think a takeaway from this exercise is that picking the right learning rate is
both a bit of an art and a science and so it shouldn't come really as a surprise that there isn't really
one perfect solution for picking a good learning rate either.
So even if you go to the literature on machine learning you'll find that there are different approaches
for picking a good learning rate.
Now I've talked a little bit about two of the things that this optimization algorithm is sensitive to
these two knobs right.
That we had that we could turn the initial guess and the learning rate and you might come away thinking
that oh you know gradient descent it's you know it's a bad algorithm because it can have certain problems.
And yet you know it it has pros and cons but one of the really really big advantages of gradient descent
is that it is incredibly simple is an incredibly simple algorithm and is also quite fast so it's quite
a fast thing to run to train your machine learning model and that's an advantage that not every other
competing algorithm can claim for themselves.
So given its relative simplicity and speed you can actually try out different learning rates for your
cost function and see what works see what works best.
But of course there's more elegant approaches to picking a learning rate as well.
For example we could adjust our learning rate while the algorithm runs meaning the learning rate doesn't
have to be fixed.
The learning rate could chop and change after each step in our loop.
So why would we do that much or ask why would we have a learning rate that's not fixed for a particular
value.
Why would you want to update the learning rate every time the loop runs well.
So the idea behind that is that the further you are from an optimal value the faster you should move
towards that minimum and thus the ideal value of your learning rate should be larger but on the other
hand once you start getting closer and closer to that minimum then the learning rate should come down
as well because you don't want to overshoot and this is why some machine learning practitioners create
like a predefined schedule for the learning rate ahead of time.
And in the schedule the learning rate starts off large and then gradually gets smaller but there is
a whole host of other techniques as well that people are using.
For example one quite simple technique is called the bold driver and it works like this.
If your error rate.
Yeah your cost was reduced since the last iteration.
Then you can try increasing the learning rate by 5 percent.
And if your error rate was in fact increased meaning that you skipped over the optimal point then you
should reset the values of your parameters to the values of the previous iteration and decrease the
learning rate by 50 percent so you can see with this kind of rule how the learning rate would change
increased by 5 percent.
If you had a reduction in your error rate and go back one step and decrease the learning rate by 50
percent.
If you had an increase in your cost.
Okay well so this was quite a theoretical lesson and we've covered quite a bit we've covered how our
algorithm is sensitive both to the initial guests and the learning rate.
And now we can start to tackle some more complicated cost functions in particular.
So far we've only been working with estimating a single value right.
When you look at geophysics there's only one thing there is hex right.
But this is only one dimension.
Let's turn our attention to how we can tackle two dimensions in our gradient descent algorithm and then
you'll see how you can tackle more than two very easily.
I'll see you in the next lesson.
Have a good one.